docs: Add metric doc (#2946)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-rust: docs/metrics.md

# OpenTelemetry Rust Metrics

<details>
<summary>Table of Contents</summary>

* [Best Practices](#best-practices)
* [Metrics API](#metrics-api)
    * [Meter](#meter)
    * [Instruments](#instruments)
* [MeterProvider Management](#meterprovider-management)
* [Memory Management](#memory-management)
    * [Example](#example)
    * [Pre-Aggregation](#pre-aggregation)
    * [Cardinality Limits](#cardinality-limits)
    * [Memory Preallocation](#memory-preallocation)
* [Metrics Correlation](#metrics-correlation)

> * [Metrics Enrichment](#metrics-enrichment)

Reviewer: this section sees missing?

</details>

## Best Practices

// TODO: Add link to the examples, once they are modified to show best
practices.

## Metrics API

### Meter

> :stop_sign: You should avoid creating

Reviewer 2: > You should avoid creating [Meter](https://docs.rs/opentelemetry/latest/opentelemetry/metrics/struct.Meter.html) too frequently.

I think we should be more specific here. "avoid creating Meter too frequently" doesn't really capture the ask well. Maybe something like:
- "You should avoid creating duplicate `Meter` instances."
- Or "You should avoid creating `Meter` instances with the same name."

[`Meter`](https://docs.rs/opentelemetry/latest/opentelemetry/metrics/struct.Meter.html)
too frequently. `Meter` is fairly expensive and meant to be reused throughout
the application. For most applications, a Meter should be obtained from `global`
and saved for re-use.

The fully qualified module name might be a good option for the Meter name.
Optionally, one may create a meter with version, schema_url, and additional
meter-level attributes as well. Both are shown in below examples.

```rust
use opentelemetry::global;
use opentelemetry::InstrumentationScope;
use opentelemetry::KeyValue;

let scope = InstrumentationScope::builder("my_company.my_product.my_library")
        .with_version("0.17")
        .with_schema_url("https://opentelemetry.io/schema/1.2.0")

>         .with_attributes([(KeyValue::new("key", "value"))])

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        .with_attributes([KeyValue::new("key", "value")])
```

        .build();

// creating Meter with InstrumentationScope, comprising of

> // name, schema and attributes.

Reviewer: nit
// Creating a Meter with InstrumentationScope (name, version, schema_url, attributes)

| [Asynchronous UpDownCounter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/api.md#asynchronous-updowncounter) | [`ObservableUpDownCounter`](https://docs.rs/opentelemetry/latest/opentelemetry/metrics/struct.ObservableUpDownCounter.html) |
| [Counter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/api.md#counter) | [`Counter`](https://docs.rs/opentelemetry/latest/opentelemetry/metrics/struct.Counter.html) |
| [Gauge](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/api.md#gauge) | [`Gauge`](https://docs.rs/opentelemetry/latest/opentelemetry/metrics/struct.Gauge.html) |
| [Histogram](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/api.md#histogram) | [`Histogram`](https://docs.rs/opentelemetry/latest/opentelemetry/metrics/struct.Histogram.html) |
| [UpDownCounter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/api.md#updowncounter) | [`UpDownCounter`](https://docs.rs/opentelemetry/latest/opentelemetry/metrics/struct.UpDownCounter.html) |

> :stop_sign: You should avoid creating instruments (e.g. `Counter`) too

Reviewer 2: Similar to https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-rust/pull/2946#discussion_r2067407462

frequently. Instruments are fairly expensive and meant to be reused. For most
applications, instruments can be created once and re-used. Instruments can also
be cloned to create multiple handles to the same instrument, but the cloning

> should not be on hot path, but instead the cloned instance should be stored and

Reviewer 2: It's not that bad to clone the instrument as it should only be a matter of incrementing the Arc atomic value, right?

Author: its not as bad as creating new one repeatedly, but the best option is to create/clone and re-use.

Reviewer 2: I agree that the best thing to do is create/clone and re-use. In my opinion, I find exaggerating the dangers of a not-so-harmful operation a bit odd. We ideally want to mention only those things that we want the users to look out for and not overstate things to lessen the burden on the user.

re-used.

> :stop_sign: You should avoid invalid instrument names.

Reviewer 2: I think we can use stronger wording here.

```suggestion
:stop_sign: Do NOT use invalid instrument names.
```

> [!NOTE] OpenTelemetry will not collect metrics from instruments that are using
> invalid names. Refer to the [OpenTelemetry
  Specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/api.md#instrument-name-syntax)
  for the valid syntax.

:stop_sign: You should avoid changing the order of attributes while reporting
measurements.

> [!WARNING] The last line of code has bad performance since the attributes are
> not following the same order as before:

```rust

> let counter = meter.u64_counter("example_counter").build();

Reviewer 2: Same as this: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-rust/pull/2946#discussion_r2067445782

counter.add(2, &[KeyValue::new("color", "red"), KeyValue::new("name", "apple")]);
counter.add(3, &[KeyValue::new("color", "green"), KeyValue::new("name", "lime")]);
counter.add(5, &[KeyValue::new("color", "yellow"), KeyValue::new("name", "lemon")]);

> counter.add(8, &[KeyValue::new("name", "lemon"), KeyValue::new("color", "yellow")]); // bad perf

Reviewer: ```suggestion
counter.add(8, &[KeyValue::new("name", "lemon"), KeyValue::new("color", "yellow")]); // bad performance
```

```

> :heavy_check_mark: You should use consistent ordering of attributes to achieve

Reviewer 2: This seems redundant as we have already covered this in the above-mentioned point.

the best performance.

> :heavy_check_mark: If feasible, provide the attributes in the sorted order of

Reviewer 2: Rephrasing suggestion:
"If feasible, provide the attributes sorted by `Key`s in an ascending order to minimize the memory usage within Metrics SDK."

`Key`s, to minimize memory usage within the Metrics SDK.

```rust

> let counter = meter.u64_counter("example_counter").build();

Reviewer 2: nit: Use `fruit_counter` as the name to match the attributes.
```suggestion
let counter = meter.u64_counter("fruit_counter").build();
```

counter.add(2, &[KeyValue::new("color", "red"), KeyValue::new("name", "apple")]);
```

### Reporting measurements via synchronous instruments

:heavy_check_mark:  When reporting measurements, use array slices for attributes
rather than creating vectors. Arrays are more efficient as they avoid
unnecessary heap allocations on the measurement path:

```rust
// Good practice: Using an array slice directly
counter.add(2, &[KeyValue::new("color", "red"), KeyValue::new("name", "apple")]);

// Avoid this: Creating a Vec is unnecessary, and it allocates on the heap
// counter.add(2, &vec![KeyValue::new("color", "red"), KeyValue::new("name", "apple")]);
```

This approach minimizes memory allocations on metrics hot paths, improving
overall performance when reporting metrics frequently.

### Reporting measurements via asynchronous instruments

Asynchronous instruments like `ObservableCounter` are ideal for reporting
metrics that are already being tracked or stored elsewhere in your application.

> These instruments allow you to observe and report the current state of existing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These instruments allow you to observe and report the current state of such metric
```

values without manually managing the aggregation yourself.

:heavy_check_mark: Use `ObservableCounter` when you already have a variable
tracking a count:

```rust
// Example: Using ObservableCounter when you already have a variable tracking counts
use opentelemetry::KeyValue;
use std::sync::atomic::{AtomicU64, Ordering};

// An existing variable in your application
static REQUEST_COUNT: AtomicU64 = AtomicU64::new(0);

// In your application code, you update this directly
fn handle_request() {
    // Process request...
    REQUEST_COUNT.fetch_add(1, Ordering::SeqCst);
}

// When setting up metrics, register an observable counter that reads from your variable
fn setup_metrics(meter: &opentelemetry::metrics::Meter) {
    let _observable_counter = meter
        .u64_observable_counter("request_count")
        .with_description("Number of requests processed")
        .with_unit("requests")
        .with_callback(|observer| {
            // Read the current value from your existing counter
            observer.observe(
                REQUEST_COUNT.load(Ordering::SeqCst), 
                &[KeyValue::new("endpoint", "/api")]
            )
        })
        .build();
}
```

> :heavy_check_mark: Use regular Counter when you need to increment counts at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:heavy_check_mark: Use synchronous Counter when you need to increment counts at
```

Reviewer: Also, the example for the regular Counter seems incorrectly placed under the asynchronous instruments section, which could cause significant confusion for readers. Probably, we can expand the sync instrument section by adding this example and add a compare/contrast note here.

specific points in your code:

```rust
// Example: Using Counter when incrementing at specific code points
use opentelemetry::KeyValue;

fn setup_metrics(meter: &opentelemetry::metrics::Meter) -> opentelemetry::metrics::Counter<u64> {
    meter
        .u64_counter("processed_items")
        .with_description("Number of items processed")
        .build()
}

// Then in your processing code:
fn process_item(counter: &opentelemetry::metrics::Counter<u64>, item_type: &str) {
    // Process item...
    
    // Increment the counter with the item type as an attribute
    counter.add(1, &[KeyValue::new("type", item_type)]);
}
```

## MeterProvider Management

> :stop_sign: Avoid creating `MeterProvider` instances too frequently. A

Reviewer 2: Similar to this: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-rust/pull/2946#discussion_r2067407462

I think we should start with something like: "Most use-cases require you to create ONLY one instance of `MeterProvider`. You should NOT create multiple instances of `MeterProvider` unless you have some unusual requirement of having different export strategies within the same application. Using multiple instances of `MeterProvider` requires users to exercise caution."

`MeterProvider` is resource-intensive and designed to be reused throughout the
application. Typically, one `MeterProvider` instance per process is sufficient.

:heavy_check_mark: Properly manage the lifecycle of `MeterProvider` instances if
you create them. Follow these guidelines:

* **Create Once, Reuse Always**: Create a single `MeterProvider` instance and

>   reuse it throughout the application. Avoid creating multiple instances to

Reviewer 2: I think we can get rid of the "Avoid creating multiple instances to ...". We should have covered that point already and also, it's more than just about conserving resources.

>   conserve resources.

Reviewer: This part seems redundant since the same advice is already given under the stop sign warning.

* **Cloning**: A `MeterProvider` is a handle to an underlying provider. Cloning
  it creates a new handle pointing to the same provider. Clone the

>   `MeterProvider` when necessary.

Reviewer: while cloning is shallow copy, we can still advice not to clone in the hot path.

* **Set as Global Provider**: Use `opentelemetry::global::set_meter_provider` to
  set a clone of the `MeterProvider` as the global provider. This ensures
  consistent usage across the application, allowing applications and libraries
  to obtain `Meter` from the global instance.

* **Shutdown**: Explicitly call `shutdown` on the `MeterProvider` at the end of
  your application to ensure all metrics are properly flushed and exported.

> > [!NOTE] Dropping the last reference to a `MeterProvider` instance implicitly

Reviewer 2: Since we are recommending using global set, we should change the order of statements in this message to specifically target people who didn't follow the global set guideline. Here's a suggestion:

"If you did not use `opentelemetry::global::set_meter_provider` to set a clone of the `MeterProvider` as the global provider, then you should be aware that dropping the last instance of `MeterProvider` implicitly call `shutdown` on the provider."

   so the SDK does not use indefinite amount of memory when there is cardinality
   explosion.
3. [**Memory Preallocation**](#memory-preallocation): SDK tries to pre-allocate
   the memory it needs at each instrument creation time.

### Example

Let us take the following example of OTel Rust metrics being used to track the
number of fruits sold:

* During the time range (T0, T1]:
  * value = 1, name = `apple`, color = `red`
  * value = 2, name = `lemon`, color = `yellow`
* During the time range (T1, T2]:
  * no fruit has been sold
* During the time range (T2, T3]:
  * value = 5, name = `apple`, color = `red`
  * value = 2, name = `apple`, color = `green`
  * value = 4, name = `lemon`, color = `yellow`
  * value = 2, name = `lemon`, color = `yellow`
  * value = 1, name = `lemon`, color = `yellow`
  * value = 3, name = `lemon`, color = `yellow`

### Example - Cumulative Aggregation Temporality

If we aggregate and export the metrics using [Cumulative Aggregation
Temporality](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/data-model.md#temporality):

* (T0, T1]
  * attributes: {name = `apple`, color = `red`}, count: `1`

>   * attributes: {verb = `lemon`, color = `yellow`}, count: `2`

Reviewer: should it be `name = lemon`, here and other places ?

last export is exported, allowing SDK to "forget" previous state.

### Pre-Aggregation

Using the [fruit example](#example), there are six measurements reported during
the time range `(T2, T3]`. Instead of exporting each individual measurement
event, the SDK aggregates them and exports only the summarized results. This
process, illustrated in the following diagram, is known as pre-aggregation:

```mermaid
graph LR

subgraph SDK
    Instrument --> | Measurements | Pre-Aggregation[Pre-Aggregation]
end

subgraph Collector
    Aggregation
end

Pre-Aggregation --> | Metrics | Aggregation
```

In addition to the in-process aggregation performed by the OpenTelemetry Rust
Metrics SDK, further aggregations can be carried out by the Collector and/or the
metrics backend.

### Pre-Aggregation Benefits

Pre-aggregation offers several advantages:

1. **Reduced Data Volume**: Summarizes measurements before export, minimizing
   network overhead and improving efficiency.
2. **Predictable Resource Usage**: Ensures consistent resource consumption by
applying [cardinality limits](#cardinality-limits) and [memory
preallocation](#memory-preallocation) during SDK initialization. In other words,

> metrics storage/network needs remains fixed, irrespective of growing volume or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
metrics memory/network usage remains capped, irrespective of growing volume or
```

changing traffic patterns.

> 3. **Improved Performance**: Reduces computational load on downstream systems,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. **Improved Performance**: Reduces serialization costs as we work with aggregated data and not the numerous individual measurements. It also reduces computational load on downstream systems,
```

   enabling them to focus on analysis and storage.

> > [!NOTE] There is no ability to export raw measurement events instead of using

Reviewer 2: Maybe just use "measurements" instead of "measurement events"?
```suggestion
> [!NOTE] There is no ability to export raw measurements instead of using
```

Reviewer 2: > instead of using pre-aggregation.

"You cannot opt out of pre-aggregation."

pre-aggregation.

### Cardinality Limits

> The number of unique combinations of attributes is called cardinality. Taking

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The number of unique combinations of attributes for a given metric is referred to as the cardinality of that metric. Taking
```

the [fruit example](#example), if we know that we can only have apple/lemon as

> the name, red/yellow/green as the color, then we can say the cardinality is 6.

Reviewer 2: It would be good to show the calculation.
```suggestion
the name, red/yellow/green as the color, then we can say the cardinality is 6 (i.e. 2 * 3).
```

No matter how many fruits we sell, we can always use the following table to
summarize the total number of fruits based on the name and color.

| Name  | Color  | Count |
| ----- | ------ | ----- |
| apple | red    | 6     |
| apple | yellow | 0     |
| apple | green  | 2     |
| lemon | red    | 0     |
| lemon | yellow | 12    |
| lemon | green  | 0     |

> In other words, we know how much storage and network are needed to collect and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In other words, we know how much memory and network are needed to collect and
```

transmit these metrics, regardless of the traffic pattern or volume.

In real world applications, the cardinality can be extremely high. Imagine if we
have a long running service and we collect metrics with 7 attributes and each
attribute can have 30 different values. We might eventually end up having to

> remember the complete set of all 21,870,000,000 combinations! This cardinality

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
remember the complete set of all 21,870,000,000 (i.e. 30^7) combinations! This cardinality
```

> remember the complete set of all 21,870,000,000 combinations! This cardinality

Reviewer: ```suggestion
remember the complete set of 30⁷ - or 21.87 billion combinations! This cardinality
```

explosion is a well-known challenge in the metrics space. For example, it can
cause surprisingly high costs in the observability system, or even be leveraged

> by hackers to launch a denial-of-service attack.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
by bad actors to launch a denial-of-service attack.
```

> by hackers to launch a denial-of-service attack.

Reviewer: nicely explained :)

[Cardinality
limit](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/sdk.md#cardinality-limits)
is a throttling mechanism which allows the metrics collection system to have a

> predictable and reliable behavior when excessive cardinality happens, whether it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
predictable and reliable behavior when there is a cardinality explosion, whether it
```

> was due to a malicious attack or developer making mistakes while writing code.

Reviewer 2: > whether it was

be it due to

leveraging the
[`cardinality_limit`](https://docs.rs/opentelemetry_sdk/latest/opentelemetry_sdk/metrics/struct.Stream.html#structfield.cardinality_limit)
setting.

It's important to understand that this cardinality limit applies only at the
OpenTelemetry SDK level, not to the ultimate cardinality of the metric as seen
by the backend system. For example, while a single process might be limited to
2000 attribute combinations per metric, the actual backend metrics system might
see much higher cardinality due to:

1. Resource attributes (such as `service.instance.id`, `host.name`, etc.) that
   can be added to each metric
2. Multiple process instances running the same application across your
   infrastructure
3. The possibility of reporting different key-value pair combinations in each
   export interval, as the cardinality limit only applies to the number of
   unique attribute combinations tracked during a single export interval. (This
   is only applicable to Delta temporality)

Therefore, the actual cardinality in your metrics backend can be orders of
magnitude higher than what any single OTel SDK process handles in an export
cycle.

#### Cardinality Limit - Implications

> Cardinality limits are enforced during each export interval, meaning the metrics

Reviewer 2: Remove this sentence from this section since this is only true for Delta?

aggregation system only allows up to the configured cardinality limit of unique
attribute combinations per metric. Understanding how this works in practice is
important:

* **Cardinality Capping**: When the limit is reached within an export interval,
  any new attribute combination is not individually tracked but instead folded
  into a single aggregation with the attribute `{"otel.metric.overflow": true}`.

>   This ensures that measurements are never lost, even when cardinality explodes.

Reviewer 2: This sentence is a bit misleading as it might be misconstrued as there is no data loss. We completely lose the attributes information of the measurement.

```suggestion
  This ensures that we correctly retain the high-level aggregates for the metric such as Sum and Count. This information can then be used to make informed decisions about the required cardinality for the metric.
```

# OpenTelemetry Rust Metrics

> 

Reviewer 3: Should we introduce the purpose of the doc?

* [Best Practices](#best-practices)
* [Metrics API](#metrics-api)
  * [Meter](#meter)
  * [Instruments](#instruments)
  * [Reporting measurements - use array slices for
    attributes](#reporting-measurements---use-array-slices-for-attributes)
  * [Reporting measurements via synchronous
    instruments](#reporting-measurements-via-synchronous-instruments)
  * [Reporting measurements via asynchronous
    instruments](#reporting-measurements-via-asynchronous-instruments)
* [MeterProvider Management](#meterprovider-management)
* [Memory Management](#memory-management)
  * [Example](#example)
  * [Pre-Aggregation](#pre-aggregation)
    * [Pre-Aggregation Benefits](#pre-aggregation-benefits)
  * [Cardinality Limits](#cardinality-limits)
    * [Cardinality Limits - Implications](#cardinality-limits---implications)
    * [Cardinality Limits - Example](#cardinality-limits---example)
  * [Memory Preallocation](#memory-preallocation)
* [Metrics Correlation](#metrics-correlation)
* [Modelling Metric Attributes](#modelling-metric-attributes)

</details>

## Best Practices

// TODO: Add link to the examples, once they are modified to show best
practices.

## Metrics API

### Meter

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

A [meter](otel arch linky) is the mechanism used to emit metrics in OTel. 

```

or something introductory perhaps

from `global` and saved for re-use.

The fully qualified module name might be a good option for the Meter name.
Optionally, one may create a meter with version, schema_url, and additional
meter-level attributes as well. Both approaches are demonstrated below.

```rust
use opentelemetry::global;
use opentelemetry::InstrumentationScope;
use opentelemetry::KeyValue;

let scope = InstrumentationScope::builder("my_company.my_product.my_library")
        .with_version("0.17")
        .with_schema_url("https://opentelemetry.io/schema/1.2.0")
        .with_attributes([KeyValue::new("key", "value")])
        .build();

// creating Meter with InstrumentationScope, comprising of
// name, version, schema and attributes.
let meter = global::meter_with_scope(scope);

// creating Meter with just name
let meter = global::meter("my_company.my_product.my_library");
```

### Instruments

OpenTelemetry defines several types of metric instruments, each optimized for
specific usage patterns. The following table maps OpenTelemetry Specification
instruments to their corresponding Rust SDK types.

:heavy_check_mark: You should understand and pick the right instrument type.

> > [!NOTE] Picking the right instrument type for your use case is crucial to

Reviewer 3: This doesn't render right but i'm not sure if it's 1/ a syntax issue or 2/ something to do with the context in which it is rendered? I believe `[!NOTE]` and friends are part of github-flavoured markdown.

Author: https://github.com/github/docs/blob/main/content/get-started/writing-on-github/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/basic-writing-and-formatting-syntax.md#alerts its supported in Github, will check why its not rendering.

// In your application code, you update this directly
fn handle_request() {
    // Process request...
    REQUEST_COUNT.fetch_add(1, Ordering::SeqCst);
}

// When setting up metrics, register an observable counter that reads from your variable
fn setup_metrics(meter: &opentelemetry::metrics::Meter) {
    let _observable_counter = meter
        .u64_observable_counter("request_count")
        .with_description("Number of requests processed")
        .with_unit("requests")
        .with_callback(|observer| {
            // Read the current value from your existing counter
            observer.observe(
                REQUEST_COUNT.load(Ordering::SeqCst), 
                &[KeyValue::new("endpoint", "/api")]
            )
        })
        .build();
}
```

> [!NOTE] The callbacks in the Observable instruments are invoked by the SDK
during each export cycle.

## MeterProvider Management

Most use-cases require you to create ONLY one instance of MeterProvider. You
should NOT create multiple instances of MeterProvider unless you have some
unusual requirement of having different export strategies within the same
application. Using multiple instances of MeterProvider requires users to

> exercise caution..

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
exercise caution.
```

> clone of the `MeterProvider` as the global provider, then you should be aware
> that dropping the last instance of `MeterProvider` implicitly calls shutdown on
> the provider.

:heavy_check_mark: Always call `shutdown` on the `MeterProvider` at the end of
your application to ensure proper cleanup.

## Memory Management

In OpenTelemetry,
[measurements](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/api.md#measurement)
are reported via the metrics API. The SDK
[aggregates](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/sdk.md#aggregation)
metrics using certain algorithms and memory management strategies to achieve
good performance and efficiency. Here are the rules which OpenTelemetry Rust
follows while implementing the metrics aggregation logic:

1. [**Pre-Aggregation**](#pre-aggregation): aggregation occurs within the SDK.
2. [**Cardinality Limits**](#cardinality-limits): the aggregation logic respects
   [cardinality
   limits](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/sdk.md#cardinality-limits),

>    so the SDK does not use indefinite amount of memory when there is cardinality

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   so the SDK does not use an indefinite amount of memory in the event of a cardinality explosion.
```

* (T0, T2]
  * attributes: {name = `apple`, color = `red`}, count: `1`
  * attributes: {name = `lemon`, color = `yellow`}, count: `2`
* (T0, T3]
  * attributes: {name = `apple`, color = `red`}, count: `6`
  * attributes: {name = `apple`, color = `green`}, count: `2`
  * attributes: {name = `lemon`, color = `yellow`}, count: `12`

Note that the start time is not advanced, and the exported values are the
cumulative total of what happened since the beginning.

### Example - Delta Aggregation Temporality

If we aggregate and export the metrics using [Delta Aggregation
Temporality](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/data-model.md#temporality):

* (T0, T1]
  * attributes: {name = `apple`, color = `red`}, count: `1`
  * attributes: {name = `lemon`, color = `yellow`}, count: `2`
* (T1, T2]
  * nothing since we do not have any measurement received
* (T2, T3]
  * attributes: {name = `apple`, color = `red`}, count: `5`
  * attributes: {name = `apple`, color = `green`}, count: `2`
  * attributes: {name = `lemon`, color = `yellow`}, count: `10`

Note that the start time is advanced after each export, and only the delta since

> last export is exported, allowing SDK to "forget" previous state.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
last export is exported, allowing the SDK to "forget" previous state.
```

### Pre-Aggregation

> 

Reviewer 3: This might go a bit to intended audience ( I think it is end users, right ? ) - but can we be more prescriptive here? 

> You should generally do X unless you need to do why, then do Z. Here's some more details on that in depth: [....]

So you don't have to read through and fully grok everything to get there

leveraging the
[`cardinality_limit`](https://docs.rs/opentelemetry_sdk/latest/opentelemetry_sdk/metrics/struct.Stream.html#structfield.cardinality_limit)
setting.

It's important to understand that this cardinality limit applies only at the
OpenTelemetry SDK level, not to the ultimate cardinality of the metric as seen
by the backend system. For example, while a single process might be limited to
2000 attribute combinations per metric, the actual backend metrics system might
see much higher cardinality due to:

1. Resource attributes (such as `service.instance.id`, `host.name`, etc.) that
   can be added to each metric
2. Multiple process instances running the same application across your
   infrastructure
3. The possibility of reporting different key-value pair combinations in each
   export interval, as the cardinality limit only applies to the number of
   unique attribute combinations tracked during a single export interval. (This
   is only applicable to Delta temporality)

Therefore, the actual cardinality in your metrics backend can be orders of
magnitude higher than what any single OTel SDK process handles in an export
cycle.

#### Cardinality Limits - Implications

> Cardinality limits are enforced for each export interval, meaning the metrics

Author: move this to within the temporality part, or remove this since this is covered

aggregation system only allows up to the configured cardinality limit of unique
attribute combinations per metric. Understanding how this works in practice is
important:

* **Cardinality Capping**: When the limit is reached within an export interval,
  any new attribute combination is not individually tracked but instead folded
  into a single aggregation with the attribute `{"otel.metric.overflow": true}`.
  This preserves the overall accuracy of aggregates (such as Sum, Count, etc.)
  even though information about specific attribute combinations is lost. Every
  measurement is accounted for - either with its original attributes or within
  the overflow bucket.

* **Temporality Effects**: The impact of cardinality limits differs based on the
  temporality mode:
  
  * **Delta Temporality**: The SDK "forgets" the state after each
    collection/export cycle. This means in each new interval, the SDK can track

>     up to the cardinality limit of completely different attribute combinations.

Reviewer 2: Rephrasing suggestion:

"the SDK can track as many unique attribute combinations as the metric's cardinality limit."

Reviewer 2: I see that you have used "distinct" in the text below. It'd be nice to stay consistent with the choice of word. "distinct" vs "unique"

"the SDK can track as many distinct attribute combinations as the metric's cardinality limit."

  
  * **Cumulative Temporality**: Since the SDK maintains state across export
    intervals, once the cardinality limit is reached, new attribute combinations
    will continue to be folded into the overflow bucket. The total number of
    distinct attribute combinations exported cannot exceed the cardinality limit
    for the lifetime of that metric instrument.

* **Impact on Monitoring**: While cardinality limits protect your system from
  unbounded resource consumption, they do mean that high-cardinality dimensions
  may not be fully represented in your metrics. Since cardinality capping can
  cause metrics to be folded into the overflow bucket, it becomes impossible to
  predict which specific attribute combinations were affected across multiple
  collection cycles or different service instances.

  This unpredictability creates several important considerations when querying
  metrics in any backend system:
  
  * **Total Accuracy**: OpenTelemetry Metrics always ensures the total
    aggregation (sum of metric values across all dimensions) remains accurate,
    even when overflow occurs.
  
  * **Attribute-Based Query Limitations**: Any metric query based on specific

>     attributes could be misleading, as it's possible those dimensions were

Reviewer 2: Let's be more specific here. This is related to the query example of "How many red apples were sold?", right?

```suggestion
    attributes could be misleading, as it's possible that measurements recorded with a superset of those dimensions were
```

    folded into the overflow bucket due to cardinality capping.
  
  * **All Attributes Affected**: When overflow occurs, it's not just

>     high-cardinality attributes that are affected. The entire attribute

Reviewer 2: This description is not so different from the above one. I think we can rearrange these sections for simpler understanding:

This unpredictability creates several important considerations when querying metrics in any backend system:
* **Total Accuracy**: ...
* **Attributes-based querying**
  * **Only partial information retained:** (this would be the "How many red apples were sold?" example). Measurements with a superset of dimensions could be folded into overflow. We only retained information for Downtown based measurements here.
  * **No information retained:** This would be the "How many items were sold in Midtown?" example. All measurements related to Midtown were folded into overflow.
  
 Does that make sense?

  
  If we later query "How many red apples were sold?" the answer would be 10, not
  13, because the Midtown sales were folded into the overflow bucket. Similarly,
  queries about "How many items were sold in Midtown?" would return 0, not 3.
  However, the total count across all dimensions (i.e How many total fruits were
  sold in (T3, T4] would correctly give 26) would be accurate.

  This limitation applies regardless of whether the attribute in question is
  naturally high-cardinality. Even low-cardinality attributes like "color"
  become unreliable for querying if they were part of attribute combinations
  that triggered overflow.

  OpenTelemetry's cardinality capping is only applied to attributes provided
  when reporting measurements via the [Metrics API](#metrics-api). In other
  words, attributes used to create `Meter` or `Resource` attributes are not
  subject to this cap.

  :heavy_check_mark: Use `Meter` attributes or `Resource` attributes as
  appropriate, see [modelling attributes](#modelling-metric-attributes) for
  details. In the above example, if a process only sells fruits from a
  particular store, then store_location attribute should be modelled as a

>   Resource - this is not only efficient, but reduced the cardinality capping

Reviewer 2: Attributes which can be modeled as `Meter` attributes or `Resource` attributes are static and do not affect cardinality. This should be done primarily for performance (reducing lookup costs). We should have this point, but it should be placed outside of cardinality capping section.

  possibility as well.

// TODO: Document how to pick cardinality limit.

### Memory Preallocation

OpenTelemetry Rust SDK aims to avoid memory allocation on the hot code path.
When this is combined with [proper use of Metrics API](#metrics-api), heap
allocation can be avoided on the hot code path.

## Metrics Correlation

Including `TraceId` and `SpanId` as attributes in metrics might seem like an
intuitive way to achieve correlation with traces or logs. However, this approach
is ineffective and can make metrics practically unusable. Moreover, it can
quickly lead to cardinality issues, resulting in metrics being capped.

A better alternative is to use a concept in OpenTelemetry called

> [exemplars](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/sdk.md#exemplar).

Reviewer 3: TIL!

consumption perspective, metrics can be multi-dimensional. Taking the [fruit
example](#example), there are two dimensions - "name" and "color". For basic
scenarios, all the dimensions can be reported during the [Metrics
API](#metrics-api) invocation, however, for less trivial scenarios, the
dimensions can come from different sources:

* [Measurements](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/api.md#measurement)
  reported via the [Metrics API](#metrics-api).
* Additional attributes provided at meter creation time via
  [`meter_with_scope`](https://docs.rs/opentelemetry/latest/opentelemetry/metrics/trait.MeterProvider.html#tymethod.meter_with_scope).
* [Resources](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/resource/sdk.md)
  configured at the `MeterProvider` level.
* Additional attributes provided by the collector. For example, [jobs and
  instances](https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/jobs_instances/) in Prometheus.

Here is the rule of thumb when modeling the dimensions:

* If the dimension is static throughout the process lifetime (e.g. the name of
  the machine, data center):

>   * If the dimension applies to all metrics, model it as Resource, or even

Author: add something about - this attributes are unaffected by cardinality capping and so queried using just these would remain accurate.

```rust
let counter = meter.u64_counter("fruits_sold").build();
counter.add(2, &[KeyValue::new("color", "red"), KeyValue::new("name", "apple")]);
counter.add(3, &[KeyValue::new("color", "green"), KeyValue::new("name", "lime")]);
counter.add(5, &[KeyValue::new("color", "yellow"), KeyValue::new("name", "lemon")]);
counter.add(8, &[KeyValue::new("name", "lemon"), KeyValue::new("color", "yellow")]); // bad performance
```

:heavy_check_mark: If feasible, provide the attributes sorted by `Key`s in
ascending order to minimize memory usage within the Metrics SDK.

```rust
let counter = meter.u64_counter("fruits_sold").build();
counter.add(2, &[KeyValue::new("color", "red"), KeyValue::new("name", "apple")]);
```

### Reporting measurements - use array slices for attributes

:heavy_check_mark:  When reporting measurements, use array slices for attributes
rather than creating vectors. Arrays are more efficient as they avoid
unnecessary heap allocations on the measurement path. This is true for both
synchronous and observable instruments.

```rust
// Good practice: Using an array slice directly
counter.add(2, &[KeyValue::new("color", "red"), KeyValue::new("name", "apple")]);

> // Usi

Reviewer 4: What's Usi

static REQUEST_COUNT: AtomicU64 = AtomicU64::new(0);

// In your application code, you update this directly
fn handle_request() {
    // Process request...
    REQUEST_COUNT.fetch_add(1, Ordering::SeqCst);
}

// When setting up metrics, register an observable counter that reads from your variable
fn setup_metrics(meter: &opentelemetry::metrics::Meter) {
    let _observable_counter = meter
        .u64_observable_counter("request_count")
        .with_description("Number of requests processed")
        .with_unit("requests")
        .with_callback(|observer| {
            // Read the current value from your existing counter
            observer.observe(
                REQUEST_COUNT.load(Ordering::SeqCst), 
                &[KeyValue::new("endpoint", "/api")]
            )
        })
        .build();
}
```

> [!NOTE] The callbacks in the Observable instruments are invoked by the SDK
during each export cycle.

## MeterProvider Management

Most use-cases require you to create ONLY one instance of MeterProvider. You
should NOT create multiple instances of MeterProvider unless you have some
unusual requirement of having different export strategies within the same

> application. Using multiple instances of MeterProvider requires users to

Reviewer 5: Can we mention thread-isolated runtimes for which per-thread meter provider instances would be quite common?

Author: I put a TODO for this. I am not sure if we should advertise for it today as each meter_provider creates its own dedicated thread today.

your application to ensure proper cleanup.

## Memory Management

In OpenTelemetry,
[measurements](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/api.md#measurement)
are reported via the metrics API. The SDK
[aggregates](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/sdk.md#aggregation)
metrics using certain algorithms and memory management strategies to achieve
good performance and efficiency. Here are the rules which OpenTelemetry Rust
follows while implementing the metrics aggregation logic:

1. [**Pre-Aggregation**](#pre-aggregation): aggregation occurs within the SDK.
2. [**Cardinality Limits**](#cardinality-limits): the aggregation logic respects
   [cardinality
   limits](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/sdk.md#cardinality-limits),
   so the SDK does not use an indefinite amount of memory in the event of a cardinality
   explosion.
3. [**Memory Preallocation**](#memory-preallocation): SDK tries to pre-allocate
   the memory it needs at each instrument creation time.

### Example

> Let us take the following example of OTel Rust metrics being used to track the

Reviewer: nit - to be consistent in usage of OTel or OpenTelemetry - as of now both have been used here.

Author: done

number of fruits sold:

* During the time range (T0, T1]:
  * value = 1, name = `apple`, color = `red`
  * value = 2, name = `lemon`, color = `yellow`
* During the time range (T1, T2]:
  * no fruit has been sold
* During the time range (T2, T3]:

>   * value = 5, name = `apple`, color = `red`

Reviewer 2: We should have the examples follow our own recommendation of providing attributes in an order sorted by Keys.

Author: done.

magnitude higher than what any single OTel SDK process handles in an export
cycle.

#### Cardinality Limits - Implications

Cardinality limits are enforced for each export interval, meaning the metrics
aggregation system only allows up to the configured cardinality limit of
distinct attribute combinations per metric. Understanding how this works in
practice is important:

* **Cardinality Capping**: When the limit is reached within an export interval,
  any new attribute combination is not individually tracked but instead folded
  into a single aggregation with the attribute `{"otel.metric.overflow": true}`.
  This preserves the overall accuracy of aggregates (such as Sum, Count, etc.)
  even though information about specific attribute combinations is lost. Every
  measurement is accounted for - either with its original attributes or within
  the overflow bucket.

* **Temporality Effects**: The impact of cardinality limits differs based on the
  temporality mode:
  
  * **Delta Temporality**: The SDK "forgets" the state after each
    collection/export cycle. This means in each new interval, the SDK can track

>     up to the cardinality limit of completely different attribute combinations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    up to the cardinality limit of distinct attribute combinations.
```
